I'm going to talk to Doris Lessing in New York.
Congratulations on this wonderful book.
I look forward to volume two.
And I wonder where you have written so much, you have put so much of yourself into your fiction.
Let's just start.
Let's kind of enter the conversation.
Why did you feel the necessity of writing an autobiography, two volumes of memoirs?
Well, it puts Doris in perspective.
I know.
People are always so interested in whether novels are autobiographical or not.
A continual query, is that true?
Is that true?
So I thought I'd get that record clear, because I think like Martha Quest, for example, is supposed to be totally autobiographical, and of course it isn't.
I'm very interested in how you integrate
the creation of certain books in the novel.
Well, this you used, and this book.
This you used, and that book.
You did mention on page 28 that there was a book you were working on, which was an attempt at an autobiography, and that nobody was interested in that.
Tell me a little bit about that.
Is this kind of a continuation of that?
Oh, no.
It was a different.
I read a book called Memoirs of a Survivor, which I thought I'd write
It originally started with the idea of writing an autobiography in dreams, because I dream a lot.
And I had this idea in my mind for years, and then I realised I was never going to do it because it was such a mammoth of undertaking.
So I thought, when I was a survivor, I used dreams, two different kinds, both personal and sort of archetypal dreams.
I called it an attempt at autobiography in metaphor.
But nobody was interested in it, save the publishers just left it off, the book, altogether.
Now, you do suggest, without necessarily saying it, I'll write it a number of times in the book, that this really is not the higher calling.
I mean, this kind of writing is not the higher calling for a writer, I mean, non-fiction.
I don't think I said that.
What interests me is that... You suggest it, I think, is what I said.
The most interesting question is why is it that a piece of writing that has not one fact in it can nevertheless be more true than something which is factual, because the atmosphere is right, or the flavour is right.
Like there are whole scenes in Master Quest which are not factual, but nevertheless they are more true
In essence, you describe that.
I don't know why.
Lisa Alfa has been quoted as saying, and I have a quote here, because I took so many pages of notes to find my own notes, but she said, almost every woman author I know acknowledges a debt to Doris Lessing.
I wonder how you respond to that, and what do you suppose she means by that, in terms of the debt to Doris Lessing?
Well, you see, I see that as literature is a great continuum, isn't it?
We all owe debts.
I owe debts to a lot of writers.
I don't see only women writers, you understand, because I don't think like that.
But I think it was the Golden Notebook, I think she was talking about, which did have a great influence in its time.
That was 1962.
Yeah.
It isn't only women that is in front, because now I get, it's surprising how often I get letters from men saying something like this, I read this book and I've given it to my wife, I've given this book to my girlfriend.
I mean, this is really an interesting development.
I had one, I'm sorry.
We lost our three.
Yes, right, I lost my, you brought your back there.
You know, sometimes it's not.
I love the quote, and I just picked quotes out of Randall, that being a novelist is not a chronicler.
And I think that was going back to what you were saying earlier.
I mean, in terms of why you strive for the truth on the one hand.
This is terrible about my black sister.
Do you want me to ask them to bring something to mend them?
No.
You know what it needs?
It means a pen.
I was just taking them out of my pocket.
No, I understand.
It happens so quickly.
Yes.
Do you have a side piece?
Yes, I do.
of anything like that.
Sorry, it's very annoying.
It's terrible trying to read in the concert.
I guess we were talking about there was a review in the Boston Globe.
Did you see the review of your book in the Boston Globe?
There's a woman by the name of Vivian Warnick.
I don't know her at all.
I think she's a New York writer.
I guess she is reviewing the book as a contemporary feminist.
I think that there's kind of some
unease about your putting quotation marks around the word attitude in this.
In this book.
In this book, yeah.
She uses the word waspishness.
That's what she sees.
Does it concern you at all?
I mean, do you feel that you are kind of in sync with, and you certainly have something to say about this generation and the generation in which you came to raise, but this generation of
so-called feminist writers.
Well, you see, I can't, and I start talking about feminism because it's an enormous subject, you know.
In fact, what she says is, you seem to dismiss the current crop of feminists.
That's basically a direct point.
Okay, well, I'm very out of sympathizing with them.
I'm, like many women in my generation, I'm terribly disappointed because
The 1960s explosion of feminism had so much energy behind it, and it's all been putted away in talk as far as I'm concerned.
Most of it's been putted away.
What has happened is that a number of white middle-class women in America and Europe have very much bettered their condition, but they haven't touched
working-class women or women in the third world and I think it was a very much badly structured movement and you know feminism was not invented in the 60s women in my generation spent a lot of time wondering how to improve things and to see this enormous energy just going to waste and squabble or complaining about men
or what's going on now, this ridiculous rubbish about taking men to court for paying them a compliment.
It is so embarrassing.
And it is such a waste.
And in the meantime, if you know what's going on in the third world, I mean, how badly women need something serious.
Well, it's heartbreaking.
So now I haven't got much time for the current feminist.
When I was young, I had what is now called a role model.
This is Gladys Marsdorff, who was the lady mayoress of Salisbury Southern Revision.
And she used to hear us young women talking, and she used to say, girls, don't waste your time and all that, she says.
What you need is equal paper, equal work, equal opportunity, that means equal training, equal education, and you need good nursery schools and kindergartens.
Until you've got that, she said, don't waste my time with all that waffle.
and nothing i have seen of the feminists in the 60s has made me change my mind that is the essence of feminism i think yeah you want to get the legal structure right don't sit around gossiping about don't set me off it makes me so sad what happened there's a wonderful line in there um you talk about your son your first child
Today, he would be called hyperactive, you say.
I mean, that word didn't even exist then.
And I suppose he would be sedated.
Again, you know, I mean, mothers of a different generation cope with an active child today or a bunch of child.
And they said, you have no idea, I mean, you must have it.
How many children are actually sedated today?
I mean, because it's not convenient for the parents, not just the mother, I guess.
And it's kind of a very depressing thing.
this concept what there wasn't an existence of hyperactivity we'd never heard the phrase he was just a very physically robust child and god knows he was but i mean you give us these little lines yeah they're little comments yeah and i guess that when you when you were structuring the book i mean you could have really just focused on the time but you couldn't you couldn't resist jumping ahead to comment i mean you even comment on
what's going on today in former Yugoslavia and all sorts of political events.
I don't see why I should have to.
I mean, I'm writing it now.
I'm looking back on my life from this perspective.
You say also that it would be a different book if you waited to write it at the age of 85.
Or at the age of 50.
At the age of 50.
Yeah.
So memory, you invoke the phrase of memory.
I wonder if this is really an exploration
for you with the whole concept of memory that this book is.
I just see the phrase memory and it is used in any number of different guises in the book.
You mentioned also that you kept a very detailed diary.
You said that when you were young you kept a charm.
I never come to jail.
I think that, well, I'll have to find a place.
You said that you were not orderly.
You were talking about when you were taking care of it.
No, no, I said, I don't know what it is.
I said, this kind of obsessiveness is useful for keeping diaries, which I've been keeping for the last 20 years.
I didn't keep one when I was young.
I see.
I'm sorry.
Obviously, you have kept them for the last 20 years.
So you really did crawl upon memory head.
Well, I spent a long amount of time thinking about memories, thoughts I've never had before at all, because the more you think about it, the more astonishing memory is.
We all know now that memories can be implanted in you by your parents.
I mean, there's no doubt about that.
A parent says, oh, do you remember, darling, how we always used to go to Brighton and you loved to make sandcastles?
And here's a picture of you.
And then the child starts remembering this kind of thing.
So memory is very slippery and very creative.
So I rely on the early part of that book for memories I really can vouch for that I know are true.
And to have them as precisely accurate as you can get them is very important to you, I gather.
Well it was then, you see, because
One of my earliest memories is of saying to myself, now look, this is what happened.
Remember it.
Don't let them talk you out of it.
So I have these very, very precise moments.
For years I used to go back and say, well, are you still intact?
Obviously it was important to me.
It's amazing to me how important, you basically educated yourself in books.
I've just written a book which will be published next year.
It's titled The Gentle Madness and There's a Love and Passion for Books.
It's in real mania, actually.
And you have so many different, you visit a house where there are a thousand books.
And it's just so bejractical.
Tell me a little bit about
this passion for reading and how it has developed.
I'd be very curious how books, I mean, it's a silly question I suppose, but clearly you are silly.
Apparently you've educated yourself in your own reading program and how it has shaped you as a writer.
Well, in the bookcase, bookcases in what was virtually an elongated mud hut were all the English classics.
So I read them from a very early age, because that's what they want to read.
And then my mother got amazing books she ordered.
You know, when you think, you know, you have to stand to England for them, that order went by sea, and then they came out by sea, and then they came by train up to buy, and then they came by train to bank it, and then they came by ox wagon to the farm.
And all these extraordinary books she ordered for us.
And a great adventure they were to me.
I think very often children who perhaps are under pressure take to reading as a kind of support.
Well, there's a book review in today's New York Times, today's Times, about, I mean, it just traces how illiterate we're getting.
I know we're getting illiterate.
It's quite terrifying.
And it's quite terrifying.
It is interesting that for something of an epigraph you choose this commentary on population growth in Africa.
Yes, I know it sounds a bit... No, the thing was this.
When this manuscript went in to the publishers and the readers, they all without exception said, on page 20 you say the population is half a million, and on page 30 you say,
I mean, you just think that in a world, you know, this exponential growth of population wasn't necessary when to spell it out, but I've spelled it out so that this in itself is a sign of illiteracy, it seems to me, that I should need to.
But I wonder why the appropriateness of putting that at the very front of the book, I thought it might have had some special significance to that.
Well, it does have a political point, because...
People forget that when the... You know, this is about the British occupation of Rhodesia, this background to this book.
People don't seem to know that when the British arrived, there were a quarter million blacks in that whole territory, which is the size of Spain.
And now the number you basically projected, it's... They think it is 12 million.
And they say that it's going to treble by 2010.
I mean, if that's true, it's a tragedy, believe me.
So in a bizarrely ironic way, the Westerner is responsible for this out-of-control multiplication of the population?
You mentioned how the cultivation of maize... Well, I think that's it.
I never realized that.
That's fascinating.
The Portuguese introduced it.
You know, there are so many theories about this.
There are as many theories as there are people, experts.
The easy one is to say that Western medicine has stopped so many babies dying.
But they had a medicine, you know.
And the other one is, well, they had all these droughts and famines, but they did in fact have a pretty efficient system of storing grain.
But now, they say, it's because they had very small, sparse grains before, and maize, as you know, is a very fat,
nourishing, easily to grow.
And store.
Yes, and they think it's, one of the theories is that it's because the Portuguese introduced maize, and this has become the food for the whole of Southern Africa.
Excuse me.
Do you, when you've written such a, in fact, my 12-year-old daughter asked me today, who are you into doing daddy in?
And I told her Doris Blessing, and she said, she has read your story through the tunnel, which we read together.
And it's amazing how many children had read that particular story.
So you really have a body of readers that is vast.
I mean, it just crosses all kinds of age groups.
I wonder, when you're writing, when you're beginning the creative process, is there a reader that you have to write?
Never has been.
I'm always concerned with getting it right in terms of what I'm trying to do.
You have a story or whatever it is.
It's an interesting question in itself.
What is this form that we need?
I'm trying to get that right.
And I'm trying not to think of possible reactions because then you can get very scared, you know.
because several times I have known that I'm being abrasive, and I try not to think about it.
Do you write to entertain?
No, I write.
You know, you're going to the roots of everything when you ask that question.
I don't know how to answer it.
I think writers like me are always trying to find out
something, whatever it is.
When you write a book, you're finding out.
It's a discovery process.
So to go back to an earlier question, it is an explanation.
Yeah, it is.
It's very exciting when you start a book because you know you're going to know very much more when you've finished it than when you started it.
Do you know basically where you're headed when you start?
I have a story.
I have roughly the characters that sometimes one or two will creep in.
And I have the tone, which is the most important thing of all, the tone of voice.
But I know that ideas are going to come to my head that I haven't got at the moment.
They're going to be new ideas, new insights.
Now, you just said you don't write to entertain.
Well, I'm delighted if I entertain.
But of course you do, as you know.
The writer certainly does have a mandate to engage this reader out there, whoever she or he may be.
And I know so many authors who have political agendas to promote.
I mean, in fiction, generally fail.
And I find that so many wonderful writers become too politicized.
You've avoided that.
You've not allowed that to happen, I guess is what I'm trying to say.
I mean, you certainly have very strong beliefs and ideas and other things that you wanted to say about the human tradition.
and you have chosen to do it through the form of the novel and fiction.
How do you walk that fine line from being too didactic in it?
Because I'm always writing about experience.
Is that a clear question?
No, no, it's fine.
Because what I'm doing is to write out of experience.
And when you're doing that, you're writing from your solar plexus, as it were,
Whereas if you are writing didactically or writing on the top of the head.
Now, for example, I once wrote a purely polemical book.
It's called The Sentimental Agents of Valian.
It's in my cannabis in August.
And it's a deliberately polemical book.
It's social satire.
And it's got two-dimensional characters.
And it's about rhetoric.
political rhetoric and making fun of it.
Now that is the only time I've done it.
And I know the difference.
I was writing it up here somewhere.
Whereas the other writing comes from, you write it with your whole body.
For the sake of the tape recorder, when you said coming out of here, you were... Top of my head somewhere.
You were grasping your head, meaning your brain as opposed to your heart, I guess.
Not my heart.
You sort of, when you're writing a novel properly,
You were writing with all of yourself.
You were writing with memories and... Ideas is the wrong word.
It's a whole complex of knowledge that you have about the situation on a person, which is very different from the polemical writing which politicos always want you to do, you know.
Which, of course, pleases them, but then you're going to lose the people who read books, too, I think.
Yes, you do.
You've done so much experimentation with form.
Do you kind of get bored if you've done something and it satisfies you?
I mean, it has achieved your expectations of it?
I mean, you mentioned the Cannabis series.
That was really quite a bold departure for you, wasn't it, to go and see the future?
You see, I didn't see it like that.
When I started off, I wasn't thinking that I am writing science fiction.
I didn't know that.
And I noticed I didn't use the phrase.
No, I know, but I wasn't.
I had a different approach.
Somebody said to me, not from our culture, a Muslim, an old friend of mine said, nobody ever...
does the following.
They read the Old Testament, the New Testament, the Apocrypha, and the Koran.
If they did that, they would see that these are stages of the same religion.
It fascinated me, so I did that, of course.
And having done that, I thought, well... You went and read those four books.
Well, they're not four.
The Old Testament.
The Apocrypha is a great mass.
Right.
I mean, you read all those books that you just enumerated.
Yes, in sequence, as the suggested.
And what, they are, it is the same origin, only in different phases, obviously.
So, not of course that one can say this to some passionate Muslim or passionate Jew.
I mean, however, so I thought, what I was interested in was the ideas they have in common.
Because they have many ideas and the same characters in common.
very often, you know, as if this is a great pageant.
I'm not being irreverent, you know.
No, I'm agreeing with you.
And they're the same characters.
And so I thought, how could I use some of these ideas in a book for our time?
And our book for our time is somewhat religious.
One of our Daleks, if you like, is space fiction.
So I thought,
So that's how I wrote Shacasta, but I wasn't planning to write anymore.
And then I got, for some reason or another, that set off some kind of creativity or other, and I wrote marriages between zones 3, 4, and 5, which I'd had in my head for 10 years, and I couldn't solve it.
In that form, or now all of a sudden it made sense to put it into this sequence of books?
Something about it just gelled it.
Something about the idea gelled the whole thing.
But then it clearly belonged in that sequence, though.
Well, it didn't before.
Well, it did.
But when you had embarked upon this, how did it feel to create a whole... I love that whole idea.
And it's yours entirely.
I wouldn't mind writing.
If I am spared, as they say, I think I might try another one.
I think I might do number six.
Really?
You know, I'm getting on a bit.
Time is running out.
We all are.
You mentioned two dimensions.
You created two-dimensional characters.
I wonder if you could just expand a bit on that.
You said this was a two-dimensional exercise.
Well, that is when the characters have no real life.
They're only just embodiments of ideas.
So these characters don't pretend to be real people, like some of Voltaire's, for example, or Bernard Shaw's when he's writing to death.
So this is quite different from a real person.
This is just a person who is illustrating some thesis.
Do you test the vital signs?
of the readers.
I mean, do you hear from people out there?
Do they respond?
Yes, I do.
You see, I get the occasional letter from, even from, you see, I had thought no one had read Sentimental Agents, but I get the occasional letter about that from usually, interestingly, from people who have to teach politics.
And they like making fun of political dogmatism.
I love the concept of the Golden Notebook of exchanging sentences and to have the other person write from there.
Has that been done in your experience?
Have you done it?
Has anything like that ever happened where somebody will give you?
No.
Oh, yes.
I mean, not exactly in that form, you know, but I had the experience once of somebody ringing up and saying, I was in the
casualty department of the Royal Free Hospital, and this happened.
I saw this happen, and it's not my cup of tea, but I think it might be yours, and they dictated to me what they'd seen.
It was turned into a story called Casualty.
The book was called here, The Real Thing.
It's a little story about... I didn't see it.
The writer simply said, I know I'd ever write it, but you probably would.
It's such an amazing concept, because you think of the creative process as being something that really doesn't admit another consciousness.
It has to be all from, you'd think it would be all from one creative spirit, so to speak, but we get a sentence from somebody else and then move with that flow.
It's kind of interesting.
Well, I've never actually done that, but I can imagine it happening.
I mean, I could, if somebody said, I can't remember that sentence,
the moonlight dinted on the rifle of a young recruit on the hillside in Algiers.
If somebody said this to me, my imagination would seize up.
But I can, I know writers who would be instantly off.
Okay, that's how many is the idea.
You mentioned that you have kept a journal or a diary for the last 20 or so years, is that right?
So the next volume,
begins about 1949, I guess.
Yeah, I need to do the 50s because I have a lot of things.
So there will be more than two volumes then?
Well, I need to do, yes, I need to do the two volumes, but after that it becomes really tricky because I can write the 50s okay without really hurting anybody or talking very much about.
But after that it does become difficult.
As we come closer to it.
I assume we're talking about people who are alive.
Is this what you're talking about?
Yeah.
Because even going back in time here, you mentioned, you said, well, let's call him Renee, or let's call him Jasper, or this person.
Well, you see, we're up against children and grandchildren.
And, I mean, who cares what people are called, after all?
That is irrelevant, but I find it
charming that you've chosen to, you know, what isn't a name.
The film director, Ilya Kazan, who lives here in New York, and I interviewed him a couple of years ago on the occasion of his huge autobiography, and he said a very interesting thing.
He said, when you choose to write truthfully about yourself, he said, you have to make yourself naked before the world is directed.
You have to expose yourself
Did you feel similarly, do you think, when it came time to write down about yourself, I mean, that you really have to expose so much of yourself, your inner self?
You see, I was always going to write an autobiography at some point, but this was precipitated because people are starting to write biographies.
You mentioned that five of them at the beginning.
Well, when I started, yes, there were five.
There are two things here.
One is that they tend to be extremely
inaccurate.
So at any rate, there's a background of facts there, right?
The other thing is that... What was the second point?
This is what happens to me now.
It just goes out of my head now.
I think we're talking about exposing ourselves.
Oh yes, right.
Now, this is the point.
I have lived an extremely quiet life and I've never said anything about my life.
As soon as the Bible could start,
They're going to start unearthing all kinds of things.
My leaving two children.
And I thought...